Adding troubleshooting section for Rancher Turtles (#260)
rancher/turtles-docs: docs/next/modules/en/pages/troubleshooting/troubleshooting.adoc

| rancher-turtles-system
| caapf-controller-manager
| Controls the Cluster API Provider Framework for custom infrastructure providers

| capi-system
| capi-controller-manager
| Core Cluster API controller that reconciles main cluster resources

| rke2-bootstrap-system
| rke2-bootstrap-controller-manager
| Manages the bootstrap configuration for RKE2 nodes

| rke2-control-plane-system
| rke2-control-plane-controller-manager
| Handles the initialization and management of RKE2 control plane components

| *-system
| *-controller-manager
| Handles the initialization and management of Infrastructure provider components

| $-bootstrap-system
| $-bootstrap-controller-manager
| Manages the bootstrap configuration for custom providers

| $-control-plane-system
| $-control-plane-controller-manager
| Handles the initialization and management of custom providers control plane components
|===

'*' - depending on the infrastructure provider in use
'$' - depending on controlplane/bootstrap provider in use, e.g. kubeadm or rke2

The best method to monitor logs from different pods is by using the following method.

[source,bash]
----

> kubectl krew install stern

Reviewer: I'm also not if we should advice users to install some third party plugins

Author: Currently `stern` project is the most popular krew plugin with 3.7k stars. It is the most useful plugin, because you can tail logs from multiple pods with any tool right now. To compare `crust-gather` has only 7 starts.

----

Then you can tail logs from all pods in real time.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl stern . -n rancher-turtles-system -n rke2-bootstrap-system -n rke2-control-plane-system -n capi-system
----

== How to manage Rancher Turtles and CAPI resources

*List Rancher and Cluster API resources*

Often users are asking how to deal with long list of different CRDs created by CAPI and Rancher, here is some idea how you can deal with it.

. List all CAPI and Rancher related credentials
+
[source,bash]
----

> kubectl api-resources | grep 'cattle.io\|cluster.x-k8s.io'

Reviewer 2: `kubectl get cluster-api`  is also helpful in listing all the CAPI related resources.

Author: ok, I will change it

+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl api-resources | grep clusterclass
kubectl explain clusterclass.cluster.x-k8s.io
----
+
. Then you get a description about each field and configuration section 
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl explain clusterclass.spec
kubectl explain clusterclass.spec.controlPlane
kubectl explain clusterclasses.spec.controlPlane.machineInfrastructure
----

*List existing Rancher and Cluster API objects resources*

The most common mistake is to use the `default` namespace in Kubernetes for your work. This will make your configuration really messy and difficult to manage and troubleshoot. It is highly recommended to use separate namespaces for deploying and creating CAPI downstream clusters.

With separate namespaces, you can easily manage resources by following this method.

. Install `get-all` and `lineage` plugins using `krew` for `kubectl`
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl krew install lineage
kubectl krew install get-all
----
+
. Then list all existing resources in for example `capi-clusters` namespace where your downstream cluster configuration was deployed.
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl get-all -n capi-clusters

> ----

Reviewer 3: This is all better achieved by using `k9s`. It is also much better to share a `crust-gather` archive then use some third party plugins, as for the end user is better to work with a cluster as a whole. This includes `yaml` configurations, and resources outside of `-n capi-clusters`.

azureclusteridentity.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster-identity                     capi-clusters  33s  
azuremanagedcluster.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-l2cs6                       capi-clusters  32s  
azuremanagedclustertemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster                     capi-clusters  33s  
azuremanagedcontrolplane.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-rv8v4                  capi-clusters  32s  
azuremanagedcontrolplanetemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-control-plane  capi-clusters  33s  
azuremanagedmachinepool.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-mp-0-78tck              capi-clusters  32s  
azuremanagedmachinepool.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-mp-1-zdscw              capi-clusters  32s  
azuremanagedmachinepooltemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-pool0           capi-clusters  33s  
azuremanagedmachinepooltemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-pool1           capi-clusters  33s  
----
+
. Then you can check what the relation is between all object resources
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl lineage -n capi-clusters cluster.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1
----
+
Output:
+

> image::lineage-cluster-output.png[Output]

Reviewer 2: This image did not load for me, I got a 404. Will it be sorted once the page is published?

Author: strange it is generating for me

== How to enable debug mode for Rancher Turtles and CAPI operators

The helm chart exposes values for increasing the log level via the usual `values.yaml` configuration parameters:

* Cluster API Operator - log level for CAPI operator can also be increased using helm chart, if installed with Rancher Turtles chart use:

[source,bash]
----
        --set cluster-api-operator.logLevel=5
        --set rancherTurtles.managerArguments[0]="-v=5"
----

For example:

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles \
            -n rancher-turtles-system \

>             --set "rancherTurtles.managerArguments={--insecure-skip-verify,-v=5}" \

Reviewer 2: Can this be achieved via Rancher Dashboard as well? Or are we not considering using the dashboard for this doc?

Author: Troubleshooting should be done in cli, Rancher Dashboard is not good way for this task.

            --set cluster-api-operator.logLevel=5
----

* Cluster API Providers - edit CAPIProvider resources for providers where increasing log level is needed. Change to desidered level:

[source,bash]
----
CAPIProvider.Spec.Manager.Verbosity=5
----
(5 is equivalent to DEBUG)

== How to clean up Rancher Turtles and CAPI resources

> Sometimes cleanup of your infrastructure might fail and it might lead to pending resources. In this situation, we have to remove resources manually.

Reviewer: I don't think it is the right approach, it can leave unmanaged resources in infrastructure where clusters are created and cause conflicts in future.

Author: I have got my downstream cluster so many times in this state, that these deserve for a description in this guide. Users will stuck too with this same problem

:doctype: book

= Rancher Turtles Troubleshooting

This guide provides troubleshooting steps for Rancher Turtles and Cluster API (CAPI) clusters. It covers common issues and their resolutions to help you maintain a stable and functional environment.

Before reading this guide, you can first look at the official https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/user/troubleshooting[`troubleshooting`] documentation for the CAPI project.

Understanding the intricacies of both Rancher Turtles and CAPI is crucial for effective troubleshooting. This guide aims to equip you with the knowledge to diagnose and resolve basic problems in Rancher Turtles and CAPI.

== Prerequisites

To effectively troubleshoot Rancher Turtles and CAPI clusters, you need:

* Access to a terminal with kubectl configured to access Rancher management cluster
* Krew plugin manager for kubectl installed
* Helm CLI tool installed

You can install Krew by following the instructions at https://krew.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user-guide/setup/install/[Krew installation guide].

== How to check the logs

> To chek the logs you can check following pods in namespaces:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can view the following pods and check their logs in namespaces:
```

Author: fixed

----

Then you can tail logs from all pods in real time.

[source,bash]
----
kubectl stern . -n rancher-turtles-system -n rke2-bootstrap-system -n rke2-control-plane-system -n capi-system
----

or

[source,bash]
----
kubectl stern -A -l control-plane=controller-manager
----

== How to manage Rancher Turtles and CAPI resources

*List Rancher and Cluster API resources*

Often users are asking how to deal with long list of different CRDs created by CAPI and Rancher, here is some idea how you can deal with it.

. List all CAPI and Rancher related credentials
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl api-resources | grep 'cattle.io\|cluster.x-k8s.io'
----
+
. About the resource, you can get a full explanation of what it is doing or what the configuration options are
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl api-resources | grep clusterclass
kubectl explain clusterclass.cluster.x-k8s.io
----
+
. Then you get a description about each field and configuration section 
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl explain clusterclass.spec
kubectl explain clusterclass.spec.controlPlane
kubectl explain clusterclasses.spec.controlPlane.machineInfrastructure
----

*List existing Rancher and Cluster API objects resources*

> The most common mistake is to use the `default` namespace in Kubernetes for your work. This will make your configuration really messy and difficult to manage and troubleshoot. It is highly recommended to use separate namespaces for deploying and creating CAPI downstream clusters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most common mistake is to use the `default` namespace in Kubernetes for your work. This will make your configuration really messy and difficult to manage and troubleshoot. It is highly recommended to use separate namespaces for deploying and creating CAPI downstream clusters, and avoid using kubernetes system namespaces, such as `default` and `kube-*`.

When applying templates with `kubectl`, always specify `-n <namespace>` to provision resources in a known location.
```

Author: added

azuremanagedmachinepool.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-mp-1-zdscw              capi-clusters  32s  
azuremanagedmachinepooltemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-pool0           capi-clusters  33s  
azuremanagedmachinepooltemplate.infrastructure.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1-pool1           capi-clusters  33s  
----
+
. Then you can check what the relation is between all object resources
+
[source,bash]
----
kubectl lineage -n capi-clusters cluster.cluster.x-k8s.io/cluster1
----
+
Output:
+
image::lineage-cluster-output.png[Output]

== How to enable debug mode for Rancher Turtles and CAPI operators

The helm chart exposes values for increasing the log level via the usual `values.yaml` configuration parameters:

* Cluster API Operator - log level for CAPI operator can also be increased using helm chart, if installed with Rancher Turtles chart use:

[source,bash]
----
        --set cluster-api-operator.logLevel=5
        --set rancherTurtles.managerArguments[0]="-v=5"
----

For example:

[source,bash]
----
helm upgrade rancher-turtles turtles/rancher-turtles \

>             -n rancher-turtles-system \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            -n rancher-turtles-system \
            --reuse-values \
```

To keep users safe from overriding selected custom settings.

Author: great idea

            --set "rancherTurtles.managerArguments={--insecure-skip-verify,-v=5}" \
            --set cluster-api-operator.logLevel=5
----

* Cluster API Providers - edit CAPIProvider resources for providers where increasing log level is needed. Change to desidered level:

[source,bash]
----
CAPIProvider.Spec.Manager.Verbosity=5
----
(5 is equivalent to DEBUG)

> == How to collect infortmation from Rancher Turtles and CAPI

Reviewer 3: ❤️

crust-gather --help
----

You can specify a list of filters to collect data. By default it takes a full cluster snapshot. Data is stored in crust-gather dir by default.
Crust gather accepts a pre-defined filter configs for Rancher or child cluster. Kubeconfig should point to the correct cluster.
Usage with https://gist.github.com/Danil-Grigorev/0a1e629090772330bf817176ed99f324[config] file:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl crust-gather collect-from-config -c config.yaml
----

Usage via regular flags:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl crust-gather collect --include-namespace rancher-turtles-system --include-namespace capi-* --include-namespace cattle* --include-namespace c-* --include-namespace=<any-capi-cluster-namespace> --kubeconfig=<KUBECONFIG>
----

You can specify a file with secrets or environment variables with secrets strings to exclude. 

For example:

[source,bash]
----
kubectl crust-gather collect -s ENV_WITH_SECRET --secrets-file=secrets.txt
----

Or exclude all secret resources from collection: 

[source,bash]
----
kubectl crust-gather collect --exclude-kind Secret
----

== How to clean up Rancher Turtles and CAPI resources

> Sometimes cleanup of your infrastructure might fail and it might lead to pending resources. In this situation, we have to remove resources manually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometimes cleanup of your infrastructure might fail and it might lead to pending resources. In this situation, we have to remove resources manually.

Keep in mind, that removal of finalizers manually **will** require to perform manual cleanup of provisioned resources by the infrastructure provider.
```

Author: awesome
